METHODS


1. APHID LINES AND BACTERIAL ISOLATES

Fourteen laboratory lines of the black bean aphid Aphis fabae were used. All fourteen share a
single host genotype, clone A06-407, and each carries a different isolate of the facultative
endosymbiont Candidatus Hamiltonella defensa. The isolates are designated H15, H16, H28, H42,
H76, H85, H101, H103, H131, H191, H214, H244, H402 and H619, and are referred to below by the
sample identifiers S01 to S14 in that order. Every line also carries the obligate endosymbiont
Buchnera aphidicola, which likewise occurs as a single genotype across the panel.

2. DNA EXTRACTION AND SEQUENCING

High molecular weight DNA was extracted from each line with the illustra Nucleon PhytoPure
genomic DNA extraction kit at the 0.1 g scale (Cytiva, product code RPN8510), following the
manufacturer's protocol. Whole aphids were ground with a plastic pestle in the kit's lysis
reagent. This is a chloroform extraction intended for plant and fungal tissue, and it was used
here for its polysaccharide-binding resin: aphids feed on phloem sap, and plant-derived
polysaccharide carried in the insect tissue otherwise co-purifies with the DNA and interferes with
library preparation.

DNA submitted for sequencing ranged from 11.8 to 50.6 micrograms per sample, with absorbance
ratios of 1.82 to 1.85 at 260/280 nm and 1.88 to 2.28 at 260/230 nm.

Libraries were prepared and sequenced at the Functional Genomics Center Zurich, with a fragment
size selection during library preparation targeting molecules of approximately 8 kb. All fourteen
samples were multiplexed with symmetric dual barcodes bc2177 to bc2190 on a single PacBio SMRT
cell and sequenced as circular consensus (HiFi) reads in run m64141e_240627_145720. Yield ranged
from 0.80 to 1.40 Gb per sample, giving 99,660 to 165,563 reads per sample and 1,854,542 reads in
total. Mean read length ranged from 7,527 to 8,639 bp and read N50 from 7,678 to 8,983 bp, so the
recovered fragment lengths match the size selection. Full per-sample statistics are given in
Supplementary Table S1.


3. METAGENOME ASSEMBLY AND SELECTION OF HAMILTONELLA READS

Each aphid sample is a mixture of host, obligate symbiont, facultative symbiont, bacteriophage
and environmental sequence, so reads belonging to H. defensa were identified through an initial
metagenome assembly before the genome itself was assembled. The two assemblers used at the two
stages were chosen for complementary strengths: hifiasm handles a mixed sample containing
non-target sequence better, while Flye resolves circular elements more reliably, so the first is
used to separate the target from everything else and the second to produce the genome.

The HiFi reads of each sample were assembled separately with hifiasm in primary mode using eight
threads, and the primary contig graph was converted to FASTA:

    hifiasm --primary -t 8 -o <sample> <reads.fastq.gz>

Contigs were then classified with BlobToolKit from four kinds of evidence. Read coverage was
obtained by mapping the sample's own reads back to its assembly:

    minimap2 -ax map-pb -t 8 <assembly> <reads> | samtools view -bS -@ 8 - \
      | samtools sort -@ 8 -o <sample>.bam
    samtools index -c <sample>.bam

Gene-space completeness was assessed with BUSCO in genome mode against the enterobacterales_odb10
lineage. Nucleotide-level taxonomy came from a local copy of the NCBI nt database:

    blastn -db nt -query <assembly> -outfmt "6 qseqid staxids bitscore std" \
      -max_target_seqs 10 -max_hsps 1 -evalue 1e-25 -num_threads 16

and protein-level taxonomy from the UniProt reference proteomes:

    diamond blastx --query <assembly> --db reference_proteomes --outfmt 6 qseqid staxids bitscore \
      --sensitive --max-target-seqs 1 --evalue 1e-25 --threads 16

The four evidence types were combined into a BlobDir with blobtools create, using the NCBI
new_taxdump taxonomy, and contigs were selected interactively in the BlobToolKit viewer. The
retained set was defined by GC content between 0.35 and 0.50, exclusion of superkingdom Eukaryota,
exclusion of the enterobacterial families Erwiniaceae, Yersiniaceae and Morganellaceae and of the
genus Providencia, and deliberate retention of phylum Uroviricota so that tailed bacteriophage
sequence was kept. Minimum contig length and minimum coverage were set per sample. The saved
filter definitions for all fourteen samples are distributed with the analysis code, so the
selection can be replayed without the interactive step.

Reads were then assigned to the retained contigs. Contig names were taken from the filtered
assembly, the names of reads aligning to those contigs were extracted from the coverage alignment,
and the corresponding reads were pulled from the original FASTQ with seqtk subseq. These filtered
read sets are the input to genome assembly.

Because this selection step precedes everything else, it was audited directly. All 68,863 contigs
discarded across the panel were aligned against the H. defensa 5AT reference genome (CP001277.1)
and against the APSE genomes reported here. Only two discarded contigs carry genuine target
sequence, and both are wholly contained in the retained assembly of their sample, so nothing was
lost by removing them. The remainder align over only 1.5 to 2.5 kb at 88 to 90 per cent identity.
That figure is interpretable because the retained chromosomes of this panel align to 5AT at 91.1
to 94.6 per cent weighted identity over 1.5 to 2.0 Mb, so alignments below about 91 per cent are
not H. defensa.


4. GENOME ASSEMBLY

The filtered read set of each sample was assembled de novo with Flye 2.9.2 in HiFi mode using
eight threads and otherwise default parameters:

    flye --pacbio-hifi <reads.fq> --out-dir <sample> --threads 8

Sample S07 did not assemble under these parameters, returning zero disjointigs, and was assembled
with Flye 2.9.3 using a longer minimum overlap in metagenome mode, --min-overlap 10000 --meta.
The requirement for metagenome mode in this one sample is itself informative: that mode exists to
handle uneven coverage arising from several elements of differing abundance, which is the
configuration established for this sample in section 7.

Each assembly was passed through a second BlobToolKit classification, built as above but from
coverage, BUSCO and blastn evidence only, and inspected for residual non-target contigs.


5. CONTIG CURATION AND REPLICON ASSIGNMENT

Each assembly was self-aligned with minimap2 to identify contigs contained within another contig.
Containment alone does not determine what such a pair represents. APSE bacteriophage genomes share
a highly conserved backbone and differ mainly at a single toxin-encoding module, so two distinct
phages present as one contig nested inside another exactly as one phage assembled in both its
integrated and its excised form does. The two cases were therefore separated on content rather
than on structure: on which toxin coding sequence a contig carries, on which integrase type it
carries, and on read depth. A contig indistinguishable from a region of the longer contig, with
the same toxin and the same integrase, was removed as redundant. A contig carrying a toxin or an
integrase absent from the longer contig was retained, and such contigs are the starting templates
for the read partitioning described in section 7.

Chromosome fragments whose ends overlapped by several kilobases, confirmed against the assembly
graph, were joined into a single sequence. Where the terminal overlap supported a join but the
sequence spanning it was absent from both contigs, the intervening sequence was taken from the
corresponding edge of the assembly graph and verified against reads. This applies to two joins in
S10, where the missing sequence is a 3,243 bp ribosomal RNA operon present in three copies in that
genome, and it matches the reads crossing each join at 99.9 per cent identity.

Every contig was then assigned to a replicon class from four independent lines of evidence:
alignment against published H. defensa genomes and plasmids (CP001277.1, CP017606.1, pHD5AT,
p3_M47 and p4_M47), against the aphid genome assembled from the same reads, and against the APSE
genomes reported here; presence of the same sequence in other samples of the panel; topology; and
read depth expressed as a ratio to the chromosome of the same sample. Contigs aligning to the
aphid genome along their full length are host DNA and are not part of the H. defensa assembly;
ten such contigs were identified across S02, S03, S05, S08 and S09 and are excluded.

Topology in the FASTA headers is a statement about the molecule, tested against reads as described
in section 9, and is not taken from the assembler. Every chromosome is reported as linear: no read
links the ends of any chromosome in this panel, and closing them is beyond the resolution of this
data. Headers otherwise follow NCBI submission specification. Information about how each sequence
was produced is kept out of the headers and recorded in a separate provenance table.


6. DETECTION OF MULTIPLE APSE PHAGES AND MULTIPLE HAMILTONELLA STRAINS

Every sample was screened for the presence of more than one APSE phage, and separately for the
presence of more than one H. defensa strain, using three tests with independent blind spots. The
tests are run together because each fails in a different case: heterozygosity detects a second
phage only if the assembler collapsed the two into one sequence, and misses two phages divergent
enough to assemble separately; toxin content detects a second phage only if it carries a
different, catalogued toxin, and misses two phages of the same family; and integrase typing
detects a second phage only if the two carry different integrases.

Heterozygosity was measured by mapping each sample's filtered reads to its own assembly with
minimap2 in HiFi mode and generating a pileup with samtools mpileup -q 20 -Q 20 --no-BAQ. A site
was counted as heterozygous at a read depth of at least 10, a minor allele count of at least 3 and
a minor allele fraction of at least 0.15. Mapping quality was capped at 20 to exclude reads that
align equally well to two near-identical copies of the same sequence, and base quality at 20. The
depth and count thresholds keep isolated sequencing errors, which in HiFi data are almost always
single-read events, from being counted; the 0.15 fraction sits far above the error floor of a
platform with better than 99.5 per cent base accuracy. Heterozygous sites were counted per
kilobase of APSE-aligned sequence, restricted to APSE-aligned intervals rather than whole contigs,
because a prophage occupies about two per cent of a 2 Mb chromosome and whole-contig statistics
dilute it to nothing.

The spatial distribution of heterozygous sites carries as much information as their number. Sites
were clustered with a maximum gap of 20 kb, and a sequence whose sites span more than half its
length was called dispersed. This distinction is necessary rather than cosmetic: every H. defensa
chromosome in this panel contains a single block of roughly 10 kb that generates hundreds of
heterozygous sites, and without the clustering step every sample would be reported as a strain
mixture. In S12 that block spans 9.9 kb of a 987 kb contig, a dispersal fraction of 0.010.

Toxin content was tested by searching both the assembly and the raw reads for each of fifteen APSE
toxin coding sequences spanning five families, requiring 80 per cent of the gene to be covered
before it was called present. Searching the reads as well as the assembly is what allows a toxin
that is present in the sample but absent from every assembly to be detected. Toxin names were
normalised to their family before counting, because two members of one family can be similar
enough to cross-map: the cdtB genes of S07 and S12 differ at a single nucleotide.

Integrase type was determined by aligning two reference integrase genes against the assembly with
minimap2 -x asm20, calling a type present at 90 per cent breadth and 95 per cent identity. The two
integrases are unrelated, 1,173 bp and 391 aa for type A and 1,035 bp and 345 aa for type B, and
share no 21-mer. Carrying both types means two phages, and this test needs no reads.

The same heterozygosity measurement applied to the chromosome answers the strain question. This
control is necessary rather than optional, because two H. defensa strains each carrying one phage
would produce the same phage-level signal as one strain carrying two.

The screen has no measurable false-positive rate at phage-level depth: in S12 the APSE sequence
yields zero heterozygous sites at 1,394-fold coverage. A negative result was reported as
insufficient power rather than as an absence wherever APSE depth fell below 30-fold, which applies
to S10 at 10.2-fold and S14 at 15.3-fold.

Two samples, S05 and S07, carry two APSE phages, agreed by all three tests. Every other sample
carries one. Every chromosome in the panel is a single strain.


7. SEPARATION AND ASSEMBLY OF CO-OCCURRING PHAGES

Where a sample carries more than one APSE phage, the two share a near-identical backbone and
cannot be separated by assembly alone. Reads were therefore assigned to one phage or the other
before anything was assembled, and each set assembled independently. Throughout this procedure the
reference sequences act only as a classifier of reads and contribute no base to the output: the
reported sequence comes entirely from de novo assembly of the sorted reads. The requirement on
the starting references is accordingly not that they be free of misassembly but that between them
they span the diversity present in the sample, since a lineage with no matching reference has its
reads misassigned rather than merely mis-polished.

Starting references were the sample's own assembly contigs, grouped by integrase type and toxin
family as described in section 5. Canonical 31-mers were computed from raw read sequence, and
those occurring in exactly one reference were treated as diagnostic. A read carrying diagnostic
k-mers of one phage was assigned to that phage. A read carrying no diagnostic k-mer of either was
assigned to both, which is correct because the phages are identical wherever such a read lies, so
both assemblies receive the same sequence there, and withholding these reads fragments both. A
read carrying diagnostic k-mers of both phages was treated as a recombinant molecule and withheld
from both sets, subject to the criterion in section 12.

Sorting on k-mers rather than on alignment score is necessary at this level of similarity. A read
consisting of eight kilobases of shared backbone plus twenty discriminating positions falls below
any sensible alignment score margin and is called ambiguous, so the more abundant phage floods the
minority set and the assembler builds an incorrect consensus across the shared region.

Where one lineage is itself a recombinant of the other two it has almost no unique k-mers, since
nearly every k-mer it carries is shared with a parent. Reads were assigned in that case by
containment, that is by how many of a read's k-mers each reference holds, because a mosaic matches
a mosaic reference along its whole length while each parent matches only part of it.

Each read set was thinned with seqtk to approximately 150-fold and assembled with Flye 2.9.6:

    flye --pacbio-hifi <pile.fq> --out-dir <out> --meta

Thinning is necessary rather than cosmetic: the untrimmed sets reach several thousand-fold, which
is far more than the assembler requires and enough to destabilise it. The depths used were 147,
146, 153, 167 and 138-fold for the five reconstructions.

The procedure was iterated, each round's assemblies becoming the next round's classifier, until
read assignment stopped changing. Assignment converged after one iteration in S07, with 99.8 per
cent of reads receiving the same call, and after two in S05. Iteration is stopped at convergence
rather than continued: for a lineage that is itself a recombinant, further rounds make the read
set more exclusive and the assembly correspondingly shorter, from 36,535 to 36,345 to 36,248 to
33,092 bp across successive rounds, so the round of best coverage is the one reported.


8. ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA AND VALIDATION OF THE PHAGE GENOMES

Each phage genome had to satisfy five conditions before being accepted.

First, heterozygosity. The reads assigned to a phage were mapped back onto its own assembly and
heterozygous sites counted as in section 6. The benchmark is the single-phage sample S12 at 0.00
sites per kb. Four of the five reconstructions reach 0.00. The fifth, the RHS phage of S05, stands
at 0.13 per kb; all five sites fall within one 115 bp window in which a third, recombinant lineage
is derived from this one and the two cannot be separated. This is a limit of the data rather than
an error in the assembly.

Second, topology established against reads as described in section 9, and a length consistent with
the approximately 39 kb APSE genome.

Third, content: exactly one toxin locus and exactly one integrase locus, of the expected types.

Fourth, absence of any internal repeat longer than 3 kb, which would indicate that the assembly
had collapsed or duplicated the genome.

Fifth, coverage evenness. Any 500 bp window falling below 75 per cent of the median depth was
flagged and inspected. This test is included because heterozygosity counts substitutions and is
blind to a locus at which two lineages carry entirely unrelated sequence: there the minority reads
do not align at all, so they generate no heterozygous site and appear instead as a drop in depth.
This is how a polymorphic 436 bp cassette was found in the RHS phage of S05, in a genome that had
already passed the heterozygosity test, at which the population carries two unrelated sequences in
a ratio of approximately 58 to 42. Both versions are reported, because mapping against only the
majority version loses 42 per cent of the reads at that locus.

Reproducibility was tested by assembling each phage from read sets that share no read. Each set of
assigned reads was divided into non-overlapping subsets of approximately 150-fold and each subset
assembled independently, giving 27 assemblies across the five reconstructions. Comparison is
rotation-invariant, one sequence being doubled head to tail before alignment, because a circular
assembly may begin at any base. Twenty-one of the 27 reproduced the accepted sequence exactly, at
100 per cent coverage with no differences. Of the remaining six, two recovered the alternative
allele of the polymorphic cassette described above and two are the recombinant lineage, which
necessarily shortens when its read set is halved.

Two further agreements, each reached by an independent route, support the procedure. The RHS phage
of S05 assembled from partitioned reads is identical over 39,286 bp to the contig assembled
directly from the whole read set. The phage genomes excised from the chromosomes of S04 and S13
are identical to the phage of S03, which assembled as a free circular contig: 35,455 bp, three
samples, two methods.


9. PHAGE REFERENCE GENOMES: EXCISION AND TOPOLOGY

A standalone reference genome is reported for every APSE phage in the panel. Where the phage is
integrated in a chromosomal contig, it was excised at the direct repeat that integration
duplicates. The repeat was located empirically, as the longest exact match between the two
boundary regions, rather than assumed from a known sequence; repeat lengths of 48, 53 and 62 bp
were found. Excising between the two copies and retaining one reconstitutes the phage genome. A
same-lineage probe was used to locate the phage, because a divergent probe under-calls its extent
substantially.

Whether the phage also exists as a free circle is a separate question and was answered with reads.
The sequence was rotated by half its length so that its two ends meet in the middle, the sample's
reads were mapped to the rotated sequence, and reads spanning the join were counted; a genome
carried only as an integrated prophage cannot produce such a read, because in the chromosome its
two ends lie a whole chromosome apart. A sequence was called circular at five or more spanning
reads. The counts are 933 for S01, 1,383 for S04, 1,171 for S12, 898 for S13, 217 for S03, 96 for
S02, 110 for S08, 96 for S09, 2 for S11 and 0 for S06 and S14.

The assembler's own circularity flag disagrees with the reads in both directions, which is why it
is not used: S02 and S08 were flagged linear and are circular, while S06 carries a complete phage
sequence whose circular form is not observed, with zero spanning reads and a depth only twice that
of its chromosome, against forty times in a sample carrying the same lineage. S06 and S11 are
therefore reported as linear.

Two phage genomes are incomplete and are reported as such rather than being extended. The phage of
S10 is supported by only 46 reads at approximately tenfold depth; assembly reached 39,246 bp, of
which the terminal 5,151 bp rested on two- to fourfold coverage and was removed, leaving 34,095 bp
supported at fivefold or better. The phage of S14 is a 19,800 bp fragment at thirteenfold depth.


10. PROPHAGE PLACEMENT IN THE CHROMOSOME

A prophage was placed within a chromosome only where reads spanning the junction between
chromosome and phage supported it. The way the placement was made depends on the shape of the
assembly.

Where the assembler left the chromosome in fragments flanking the phage, the phage was placed in
the order indicated by the terminal overlaps of the flanking contigs and by the assembly graph,
and the resulting joins were verified against reads. Where the assembler had already placed the
prophage inside a chromosomal contig, the placement was verified against the same evidence and
left unchanged. Where the chromosome had assembled contiguously, the integration site was located
directly and the phage spliced in, as follows.

Reads aligning partly to the chromosome and partly to a phage were collected from the
supplementary alignment records of a mapping against chromosome and phage genomes together. The
chromosome-side breakpoints of these reads cluster to single bases, and the two breakpoints of one
site are the ends of the att core, the direct repeat that integration duplicates. The core was
then recovered independently as the longest exact match between chromosome and phage around those
breakpoints, which is a check on the coordinates rather than a restatement of them, since it
either matches exactly or it does not. Reads running continuously across the empty site, carrying
no phage sequence, give the ratio of the integrated to the excised configuration. The phage was
inserted as the circle opened at its att core, the core duplicated to form attL and attR, in the
orientation the sequence dictates.

Each placement was validated by requiring reads spanning every new junction in both orientations,
no accumulation of soft-clipped reads at any junction, heterozygosity within the prophage at
chromosomal levels, and improvement in soft-clipping and primary alignment counts genome-wide. In
S07 the four junctions are spanned by 18 and 29, 577 and 646, 33 and 27, and 274 and 325 reads;
reads carrying at least 500 bp of soft clipping fall from 10,782 to 3,568 across the genome when
the prophages are represented, and primary alignments rise from 24,986 to 25,084.

The prophage is placed in ten of the fourteen samples. In four it is not, and the reasons differ.
In S02, S09 and S14 too few reads cross the junction to locate a site, 3, 0 and 7 respectively,
which is a limit of chromosomal coverage at 16, 4.5 and 18-fold rather than a statement about the
biology. In S08 the position is constrained but not determined: 65 reads place the phage against
the end of one chromosomal contig, but that flank and the start of the adjacent contig share no
sequence, so there is no att repeat at which to splice, and placing it would assert a scaffold
join on evidence from one side only. In all four samples the phage is reported as a separate
reference genome and the chromosome is left unchanged.

The att core is a property of the integrase type rather than of the sample. The integrase-A core
is 62 bp and the integrase-B core 58 bp, and each is identical between the two samples in which it
occurs. Both lie at the 3' end of a tRNA gene, the canonical integration target for this phage
group, and in each phage the integrase gene lies between 8 and 100 bp from its own attP. Integrase
type therefore predicts which chromosomal site a phage occupies, not merely that two phages occupy
different ones.

One occupancy is not determined and is reported as such. In S05 two lineages share an integrase
type and therefore compete for a single att core at approximately 805 kb. Occupancy can be counted
only on the attL side, because on the attR side the two lineages are identical; that count gives 5
against 7, and a count over a larger read set disagreed in direction. The complete circular
lineage is placed at that site because it is the complete one, not because it is the more common.


11. PHAGE LINEAGE ASSIGNMENT

APSE genomes were compared by containment of canonical 31-mers, an alignment-free measure that
reports an intermediate value where two genomes share a backbone but differ at a cassette, and
grouped at a containment threshold of 0.95. Across the eighteen genomes compared, within-group
containment is 0.977 to 1.000 and between-group containment is 0.442 to 0.828, with no pair
anywhere between 0.83 and 0.98; the grouping is therefore insensitive to the choice of linkage
rule. Groups are named APSE-toxin-numeral.

The numeral is necessary. A shared toxin does not indicate a shared lineage: this panel contains
three distinct CdtB-carrying groups and three distinct RHS-carrying groups, and two phages sharing
both toxin family and integrase type can share as little as 59 per cent of their 31-mers. The
published APSE-1 genome carries the same Shiga-like toxin as the phage of S09 while sharing 62 per
cent of its 31-mers with it. Integrase type is recorded but is deliberately not part of the name,
since sixteen of the eighteen genomes carry type A at 99.1 to 100 per cent identity and a
character that is nearly invariant would imply a role in defining groups that it does not have.

No phylogenetic tree is presented. These genomes recombine, as shown in section 12, so a single
branching topology would describe a history that did not occur.

A partial genome cannot be assigned to a group when the candidate groups share a backbone. The
19,800 bp fragment recovered from S14 lies within sequence shared by the two MAC-toxin groups,
matching one at 0.979 and the other at 0.998, and is reported as unassigned.


12. RECOMBINATION BETWEEN CO-OCCURRING PHAGES

Recombination between two co-occurring phages was measured on raw reads, independently of any
assembly. Canonical 31-mers were computed for every read touching either phage, and those k-mers
diagnostic of each phage, present in one and absent from the other, were identified. A read was
called mosaic only if each parent contributed at least 15 diagnostic k-mers and at least 15 per
cent of the read's informative k-mers, and if the two parents' k-mers formed no more than two
blocks along the read. The requirement for spatial segregation is what makes the test evidence: a
misassembled reference can make mapped reads appear to switch parentage, but it cannot place two
parents' diagnostic k-mers into a single molecule in segregated order. Without this condition the
test counts sequencing error and short shared tracts as recombination.

Each transition was converted into coordinates in both parent genomes. A position within a read is
not a genomic position, and treating it as one makes a single junction appear as many. Two further
artefacts were excluded: on a circular genome represented as a linear sequence, every read crossing
the origin is split, and where two genomes share a backbone that split lands on the other genome;
and a genuine crossover must join homologous positions in the two parents.

The result was corroborated by a four-gamete test across non-homologous cassettes, that is
segments present in one phage with no counterpart in the other, so that presence or absence alone
assigns ancestry with no sequence identity involved.

The distribution of crossover positions distinguishes ongoing recombination from a recombinant
that has become established. Crossovers dispersed across many positions indicate recombination
without a fixed product; concentration at a single position indicates one recombinant molecule
that arose once and propagated. In S07, 61.1 per cent of reads are pure RHS, 31.4 per cent pure
CdtB, 5.3 per cent uninformative and 2.2 per cent mosaic, with 196 crossovers at 57 distinct
positions across the shared backbone; the four-gamete test independently gives 2.3 per cent,
reciprocal in both directions. In S05, 166 of 185 split reads break at a single position, and the
lineage so defined occupies an integration site, carries a combination of toxin and integrase
found in neither parent, and assembles at 0.00 heterozygous sites per kb. It is reported as a
third lineage, partial and not circular, because the only feature distinguishing it from its two
parents is a single recombination junction: reads far from that junction are indistinguishable
from a parent and cannot be assigned to it, so its genome cannot be closed.


13. ASSEMBLY STATISTICS AND COMPLETENESS

Assembly statistics were computed from the final sequences. Completeness was assessed with BUSCO
5.1.2 in genome mode with prodigal 2.6.3, offline, against the enterobacterales_odb10 lineage
dataset (created 2020-03-06; 211 genomes; 440 markers). The number of markers is stated because a
BUSCO percentage is not interpretable without its denominator and pinning the dataset is what makes
these assemblies comparable with one another and with published H. defensa genomes.

Read depth is reported separately for the chromosome and for the prophage. The phage replicates
actively in most samples and reaches tens to hundreds of times chromosomal depth, so a single
assembly-wide mean describes neither; in S01, for instance, the chromosome sits at 33-fold and the
phage at approximately 1,300-fold. Depth was measured by mapping reads to the final assembly rather
than taken from the assembler's own estimate, and the prophage interval was located by aligning the
phage genome to the assembly rather than assumed.


14. GENOME ANNOTATION

All fourteen genomes were annotated with the NCBI Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline (PGAP),
run as a standalone installation on an Amazon EC2 instance, software revision 2026-06-18.build8602:

    pgap.py -r -o <out> -g <genome.fasta> -s 'Candidatus Williamhamiltonella defendens'

Candidatus Williamhamiltonella defendens, taxid 138072, is the currently accepted name for the
organism formerly designated Candidatus Hamiltonella defensa. Annotation combines a best-placed
reference protein set with ab initio prediction by GeneMarkS-2+, and annotates genes, coding
sequences, rRNA, tRNA and other non-coding RNA.

The standalone phage reference genomes are distributed without annotation; the toxin, integrase
and attP coordinates reported for them were determined as described in sections 6, 9 and 10.

[TO BE COMPLETED: EC2 instance type, container runtime and version, and PGAP reference data
version.]


15. ASSEMBLY OF THE APHID HOST AND PRIMARY SYMBIONT GENOMES

Genomes of the host Aphis fabae and of its obligate symbiont Buchnera aphidicola were assembled
from the same sequencing, as both occur as a single genotype across the fourteen samples. These
genomes come from a different assembly than the H. defensa genomes above: rather than being
assembled per sample, all fourteen read sets were pooled into a single hifiasm metagenome assembly
in primary mode, in order to maximise coverage of the two single-genotype organisms.

    hifiasm -f0 --primary -t 8 -o merged <all fourteen read files>

Contigs were classified with BlobToolKit as in section 3, from read coverage obtained with
minimap2 -ax map-hifi, blastn against NCBI nt, and BUSCO scores computed twice, against
hemiptera_odb10 (2020-08-05) for the host and enterobacterales_odb10 for the symbiont, since the
two organisms require different marker sets. Two filters were then applied to the same assembly to
extract the aphid and the Buchnera contigs respectively.

The Buchnera assembly was curated by hand to one circular chromosome and three plasmid-like
elements; two further elements were multi-pass duplication artefacts and were trimmed, and one was
a duplicate of a chromosomal region and was removed. It was annotated with PGAP alongside the
H. defensa genomes.

The aphid assembly was cleaned with funannotate clean, which removes short contigs that are
contained within longer ones, at default coverage and identity thresholds. Repeats were modelled
with RepeatModeler using BuildDatabase and -LTRStruct, and soft-masked with RepeatMasker
(-qq -xsmall) against the resulting library. Gene models were trained with funannotate train on
publicly available Aphis fabae RNA-seq (BioSamples SAMN10606880 to SAMN10606919, unstranded) and
predicted with funannotate predict using --organism other, --ploidy 2, --max_intronlen 50000,
--repeats2evm and --optimize_augustus. Predicted proteins were searched with InterProScan
5.71-102.0 (-goterms -pa) and the results integrated with funannotate annotate.